adr: mvp light client (#311)
lazyledger/lazyledger-core: docs/lazy-adr/adr-004-mvp-light-client.md

> # ADR 004: Data Availability Sampling light-client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# LAZY ADR 004: Data Availability Sampling Light Client
```

Author: I'd actually prefer to remove the LAZY prefix even from previous ADRs. It doesn't add any value. It made sense when we kept the other (tendermint) ADRs around as well but not anymore. I'll remove it in the other existing adrs too.

Author: https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/pull/311/commits/eb64c8e0ae7c5867e92b4f899af13993175c4e0b

## Changelog

- 2021-05-03: Initial Draft

## Context

We decided to augment the existing [RCP-based Tendermint light client](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/bc643b19c48495077e0394d3e21e1d2a52c99548/light/doc.go#L2-L126) by adding the possibility to additionally validate blocks by doing Data Availability Sampling (DAS).
In general, DAS gives light clients assurance that the data behind the block header they validated is actually available in the network and hence, that state fraud proofs could be generated.
See [ADR 002](adr-002-ipld-da-sampling.md) for more context on DAS.

> A great introduction on the Tendermint light client (and light clients in general) can be found in this series of [blog posts](https://medium.com/tendermint/everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-tendermint-light-client-f80d03856f98) as well as this [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.07031).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A great introduction on the Tendermint light client (and BFT light clients in general) can be found in this series of [blog posts](https://medium.com/tendermint/everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-tendermint-light-client-f80d03856f98) as well as this [paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.07031).
```

Author: Both linked resoureces do focus on BFT light clients but they introduce the general concept of other light clients (like bitcoin's spv nodes).

> This ADR describes the changes necessary to augment the existing Tendermint light client implementation with Data Availability Sampling from a UX as well as from a protocol perspective.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ADR describes the changes necessary to augment the existing Tendermint light client implementation with DAS from a UX as well as from a protocol perspective.
```

## Alternative Approaches

Ideally, the light client should not just request [signed headers](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/bc643b19c48495077e0394d3e21e1d2a52c99548/light/doc.go#L35-L52) from [a few pre-configured peers](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/bc643b19c48495077e0394d3e21e1d2a52c99548/light/setup.go#L51-L52) but instead also discover peers from a p2p network.
We will eventually implement this. For more context, we refer to this [issue](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/issues/86).
This would require that the (signed) headers are provided via other means than the RPC.
See this [abandoned pull request](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/pull/4508) and [issue](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/4456) in the Tendermint repository and also this [suggestion](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/issues/86#issuecomment-831182564) by [@Wondertan](https://github.com/Wondertan) in this repository.

> For some use-cases - like DAS light validator nodes, or the light clients of a Data Availability that are run by full nodes of an Optimistic Rollup - it would even make sense that the light client (passively) participates in the consensus protocol to some extent; i.e. runs a subset of the consensus reactor to Consensus messages ([Votes](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/bc643b19c48495077e0394d3e21e1d2a52c99548/types/vote.go#L48-L59) etc.) come in as early as possible.

Reviewer: 1. Replace dash with em dash.
2. What is "or the light clients of a **Data Availability**"???

```suggestion
For some use-cases—like DAS light validator nodes, or the light clients of a Data Availability that are run by full nodes of an Optimistic Rollup—it would even make sense that the light client (passively) participates in the consensus protocol to some extent; i.e. runs a subset of the consensus reactor to Consensus messages ([Votes](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/bc643b19c48495077e0394d3e21e1d2a52c99548/types/vote.go#L48-L59) etc.) come in as early as possible.
```

Author: 😅I think this is supposed to be "of a Data availability layer". 

Thanks for all the feedback 🙏

Author: https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/pull/311/commits/eca6147148fd32e25b25387a5e0b90be9efe2568

Then light clients would not need to wait for the canonical commit to be included in the next [block](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/bc643b19c48495077e0394d3e21e1d2a52c99548/types/block.go#L48).

> For the RPC-based light client it could also make sense to add a new RPC endpoint to tendermint for clients to retrieve the DA header, or embed the DAHeader.

Reviewer: Link to DAHeader here instead of later, and define it in its full form.

Author: f3006e2 ?

Not all light clients will need the full [DataAvailabilityHeader](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/blob/50f722a510dd2ba8e3d31931c9d83132d6318d4b/types/block.go#L52-L69) (DAHeader) though (e.g. super-light-clients do not).

## Decision

For our MVP, we [decide](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/issues/307) to only modify the existing RPC-endpoint based light client.
This is mostly because we want to ship our MVP as quickly as possible but independently of this it makes sense to provide a familiar experience for engineers coming from the Cosmos ecosystem.

We will later implement the above mentioned variants.
How exactly will be described in separate ADRs though.

## Detailed Design

From a user perspective very little changes:
the existing light client command gets an additional flag that indicates whether to run DAS or not.
Additionally, the light client operator can decide the number of successful samples to make to deem the block available (and hence valid).

In case DAS is enabled, the light client will need to:
1. retrieve the DAHeader corresponding to the data root in the Header

> 2. request a predefined number of samples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. request a parametrizable number of random samples.
```

> If the number of samples succeed, the whole block is available (with some high enough probability).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the all sampling requests succeed, the whole block is available ([with some high enough probability](https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.09044)).
```

### UX

The main change to the light client [command](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/blob/master/cmd/tendermint/commands/light.go#L32-L104) is to add in a new flag to indicate if it should run DAS or not.

```diff
Index: cmd/tendermint/commands/light.go
===================================================================
diff --git a/cmd/tendermint/commands/light.go b/cmd/tendermint/commands/light.go
--- a/cmd/tendermint/commands/light.go	(revision cbf1f1a4a0472373289a9834b0d33e0918237b7f)
+++ b/cmd/tendermint/commands/light.go	(date 1620077232436)
@@ -64,6 +64,7 @@
 	dir                string
 	maxOpenConnections int

> +	daSampling	   bool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+	daSampling     bool
```

Author: a275f1e

2. users should be able to run a light client with a single command and hence most of the initialization logic should be coupled with creating the actual IPFS node and [made independent](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/blob/cbf1f1a4a0472373289a9834b0d33e0918237b7f/cmd/tendermint/commands/init.go#L119-L120) of the `tendermint init` command

An example for 2. can be found in the IPFS [code](https://github.com/ipfs/go-ipfs/blob/cd72589cfd41a5397bb8fc9765392bca904b596a/cmd/ipfs/daemon.go#L239) itself.
We might want to provide a slightly different default initialization though (see how this is [overridable](https://github.com/ipfs/go-ipfs/blob/cd72589cfd41a5397bb8fc9765392bca904b596a/cmd/ipfs/daemon.go#L164-L165) in the ipfs daemon cmd).

#### Light Store

The light client stores data in its own [badgerdb instance](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/blob/50f722a510dd2ba8e3d31931c9d83132d6318d4b/cmd/tendermint/commands/light.go#L125) in the given directory:

```go
db, err := badgerdb.NewDB("light-client-db", dir)
```

While it is not critical for this feature, we should at least try to re-use that same DB instance for the local ipld store.

> Otherwise, we introduce yet another DB instance - something we want to avoid, especially on the long run (see [#283](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/issues/283)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Otherwise, we introduce yet another DB instance; something we want to avoid, especially on the long run (see [#283](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/issues/283)).
```

For the first implementation, it might still be simpler to create a separate DB instance and tackle cleaning this up in a separate pull request, e.g. together with other [instances]([#283](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/issues/283)).

#### RPC

No changes to the RPC endpoints are absolutely required.
Although, for convenience and ease of use, we should either add the `DAHeader` to the existing [Commit](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/blob/cbf1f1a4a0472373289a9834b0d33e0918237b7f/rpc/core/routes.go#L25) endpoint, or, introduce a new endpoint to retrieve the `DAHeader` on demand and for a certain height or block hash.

The first has the downside that not every light client needs the DAHeader.

> The second explicitly reveals to full-nodes which clients are doing DAS and which not.

Reviewer: Generally as much anonymization as possible is preferred. We'd have to think carefully of the ramifications of even revealing that a node is doing DAS vs node.

Author: I agree. That's why I mentioned here additionally to in the "Negatives" section below.

The 3. approach is the most general of all, but it moves the responsibility to wait or to rollback headers to the caller and hence is undesirable as it offers too much flexibility.

#### Data Structures

##### LightBlock

As mentioned above the LightBlock should optionally contain the DataAvailabilityHeader.
```diff
Index: types/light.go
===================================================================
diff --git a/types/light.go b/types/light.go
--- a/types/light.go	(revision 64fdfaf9143d7af69925aae4f3ae4ea33abd61e5)
+++ b/types/light.go	(date 1620161433642)
@@ -8,11 +8,15 @@
 	tmproto "github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/proto/tendermint/types"
 )

-// LightBlock is a SignedHeader and a ValidatorSet.
-// It is the basis of the light client
+// LightBlock is a SignedHeader and a ValidatorSet
+// and optionally a DataAvailabilityHeader (for DAS light clients).
+// It is the basis of the light client.
 type LightBlock struct {
-	*SignedHeader `json:"signed_header"`
-	ValidatorSet  *ValidatorSet `json:"validator_set"`
+	*SignedHeader          `json:"signed_header"`

> +	ValidatorSet           *ValidatorSet           `json:"validator_set"`

Reviewer: These two lines don't seem to actually be changed? Can they be removed from the diff?

Author: 2dddade

(a lot of `d`s this time)

Not all light clients will need the full DAHeader though (e.g. super-light-clients do not).

## Decision

For our MVP, we [decide](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/issues/307) to only modify the existing RPC-endpoint based light client.
This is mostly because we want to ship our MVP as quickly as possible but independently of this it makes sense to provide a familiar experience for engineers coming from the Cosmos ecosystem.

We will later implement the above mentioned variants.
How exactly will be described in separate ADRs though.

## Detailed Design

From a user perspective very little changes:
the existing light client command gets an additional flag that indicates whether to run DAS or not.
Additionally, the light client operator can decide the number of successful samples to make to deem the block available (and hence valid).

In case DAS is enabled, the light client will need to:
1. retrieve the DAHeader corresponding to the data root in the Header

> 2. request a parameterizable number of random samples.

Reviewer 2: are there any assumptions that change if a user sets a lower numer?

In case a light client is parametrized to run DAS and skipping verification, the CLI should return an easy-to-understand warning or even an error explaining why this does not make sense.

### Light Client Protocol with DAS

#### Light Store

The light client stores data in its own [badgerdb instance](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/blob/50f722a510dd2ba8e3d31931c9d83132d6318d4b/cmd/tendermint/commands/light.go#L125) in the given directory:

```go
db, err := badgerdb.NewDB("light-client-db", dir)
```

While it is not critical for this feature, we should at least try to re-use that same DB instance for the local ipld store.
Otherwise, we introduce yet another DB instance; something we want to avoid, especially on the long run (see [#283](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/issues/283)).
For the first implementation, it might still be simpler to create a separate DB instance and tackle cleaning this up in a separate pull request, e.g. together with other [instances]([#283](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/issues/283)).

#### RPC

No changes to the RPC endpoints are absolutely required.

> Although, for convenience and ease of use, we should either add the `DAHeader` to the existing [Commit](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/blob/cbf1f1a4a0472373289a9834b0d33e0918237b7f/rpc/core/routes.go#L25) endpoint, or, introduce a new endpoint to retrieve the `DAHeader` on demand and for a certain height or block hash.

Author: > It will be included in other data types soon.

None of the existing RPC responses a tendermint light client requests will contain the DAHeader though (the BlockID in #312 is only temporary.

> In the end, we will rely mostly on Header.DataHash instead.

True! 

> Redundantly requesting it separately is obviously not a good idea from long-living subscriptions POV, though subscribing for the whole EventNewBlock is also a bloated approach in some use-cases and EventNewBlockHeader does not contain DAHeader.

The light client itself doesn't use the event system. Are you talking about the future where the light clients will subscribe to headers as you described in https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/issues/86#issuecomment-831182564 ?

> Although, for convenience and ease of use, we should either add the `DAHeader` to the existing [Commit](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/blob/cbf1f1a4a0472373289a9834b0d33e0918237b7f/rpc/core/routes.go#L25) endpoint, or, introduce a new endpoint to retrieve the `DAHeader` on demand and for a certain height or block hash.

Reviewer 3: > Are you talking about the future where the light clients will subscribe to headers as you described in #86 (comment) ?

Nope. I was talking about EventBus within ll-core. The light client can subscribe to new things through RPC with EventBus as a backbone. 

From my understanding, EventNewBlock and EventNewBlockHeader are the most used RPC endpoint/subscription for the light clients to be always on track with the network, and doing separate requests for DAHeader to perform DAS on every subscription message does not make sense for me.

> Although, for convenience and ease of use, we should either add the `DAHeader` to the existing [Commit](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/blob/cbf1f1a4a0472373289a9834b0d33e0918237b7f/rpc/core/routes.go#L25) endpoint, or, introduce a new endpoint to retrieve the `DAHeader` on demand and for a certain height or block hash.

Reviewer 3: @liamsi, so you didn't rely on DAHeader in BlockID as temporary, but you did rely on DAHeader instead of DataHash because it weeks away? 🤔  Kinda controversial 😄, but I understand that it was not clear before that DataHash can be dropped in instead of DAHeader so I am ok with that.

> Although, for convenience and ease of use, we should either add the `DAHeader` to the existing [Commit](https://github.com/lazyledger/lazyledger-core/blob/cbf1f1a4a0472373289a9834b0d33e0918237b7f/rpc/core/routes.go#L25) endpoint, or, introduce a new endpoint to retrieve the `DAHeader` on demand and for a certain height or block hash.

Author: > @liamsi, so you didn't rely on DAHeader in BlockID as temporary, but you did rely on DAHeader instead of DataHash because it weeks away? 🤔 Kinda controversial 😄, 

What exactly is controversial about it and what are you suggesting to do about it? Please, always keep include constructive suggestions when you criticize something. Otherwise, it is not clear what improvements could be made here.

Just to clarify: Everything in this ADR is written in a way that a) does not depend on any feature that is not clearly defined or implemented yet and b) does not introduce any technical debt. 

I don't really see why it is harmful but we can (very) easily remove the additional rpc end-point in the near future if we wanted to.

It is clear that the light client could simply do with the data hash but: 1) how to do this via IPFS is not defined nor implemented yet and 2) we wouldn't have been able to ship a DAS light client as quickly if we waited on that.

> The light client can subscribe to new things through RPC with EventBus as a backbone.

That is a valuable and cool observation but it's still not how the current default light client operates: basically the rpc endpoint of the light client "drives" the light client (it gets updated on demand if you e.g. request anything with a newer height from the light client's RPC).

That said, for future light client implementations, we could use the event bus. If you want, you can write an ADR for that (it's not urgent but we should write an ADR for different variants for light clients we want, another one is #86 for instance).

Does this make sense?

The first has the downside that not every light client needs the DAHeader.
The second explicitly reveals to full-nodes which clients are doing DAS and which not.

**Implementation Note:** The additional (or modified) RPC endpoint could work as a simple first step until we implement downloading the DAHeader from a given data root in the header.
Also, the light client uses a so called [`Provider`](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/7f30bc96f014b27fbe74a546ea912740eabdda74/light/provider/provider.go#L9-L26) to retrieve [LightBlocks](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/7f30bc96f014b27fbe74a546ea912740eabdda74/types/light.go#L11-L16), i.e. signed headers and validator sets.
Currently, only the [`http` provider](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/7f30bc96f014b27fbe74a546ea912740eabdda74/light/provider/http/http.go#L1) is implemented.
Hence, as _a first implementation step_, we should augment the `Provider` and the `LightBlock` to optionally include the DAHeader (details below).
In parallel but in a separate pull request, we add a separate RPC endpoint to download the DAHeader for a certain height.

#### Store DataAvailabilityHeader

> For full nodes to be able to serve the `DataAvailabilityHeader` without having to recompute it each time, it needs to be stored somewhere.

Author: > Things would have been so much easier if we just accessed block's data by Header.DataHash in the first place.

Well, we can still do that.

> We then would not need to store DAHeader in both Full and Light node stores, but only Header, as planned.

Wouldn't it still make sense to store the DAHeader. Especially for nodes that do not have the full block data?

> For full nodes to be able to serve the `DataAvailabilityHeader` without having to recompute it each time, it needs to be stored somewhere.

Reviewer 3: > Well, we can still do that. It's a bit orthogonal to this ADR I guess?

Yep, that just a quick look retrospectively at how things could be done better. Nothing against this PR

> For full nodes to be able to serve the `DataAvailabilityHeader` without having to recompute it each time, it needs to be stored somewhere.

Reviewer 3: > Wouldn't it still make sense to store the DAHeader. Especially for nodes that do not have the full block data? 

If you have DataHash you can access full DAHeader, thus you can do anything you do with DAHeader, thus storing/treating it specifically is not needed, as it would be stored somewhere on the network.

> For full nodes to be able to serve the `DataAvailabilityHeader` without having to recompute it each time, it needs to be stored somewhere.

Author: > as it would be stored somewhere on the network.

That still means nodes will store the daheader in their local data stores. I guess the question here is: should we additionally store the daheader separately or not? This rather plays into adr 001 and #182. I would argue that most nodes will need the get the DAHeader and it could be useful to provide a shortcut via storing it as one blob instead of in ipld only (even if that is redundant). But maybe that is not necessary. 

We will see after we (you?) have written the adr for "datahash -> DaHeader" and after we have implemented this feature. Then we can measure latencies and decide.

===================================================================
diff --git a/types/light.go b/types/light.go
--- a/types/light.go	(revision 64044aa2f2f2266d1476013595aa33bb274ba161)
+++ b/types/light.go	(date 1620481205049)
@@ -13,6 +13,9 @@
 type LightBlock struct {
 	*SignedHeader `json:"signed_header"`
 	ValidatorSet  *ValidatorSet `json:"validator_set"`
+
+	// DataAvailabilityHeader is only populated for DAS light clients for others it can be nil.
+	DataAvailabilityHeader *DataAvailabilityHeader `json:"data_availability_header"`
 }
```

Alternatively, we could introduce a `DASLightBlock` that embeds a `LightBlock` and has the `DataAvailabilityHeader` as the only (non-optional) field.
This would be more explict as it is a new type.
Instead, adding a field to the existing `LightBlock`is backwards compatible and does not require any further code changes; the new type requires `To`- and `FromProto` functions at least.

##### Provider

The [`Provider`](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/7f30bc96f014b27fbe74a546ea912740eabdda74/light/provider/provider.go#L9-L26) should be changed to additionally provide the `DataAvailabilityHeader` to enable DAS light clients.

> Implementations of the interface need to additionally to retrieve the `DataAvailabilityHeader` for the [modified LightBlock](#lightblock).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Implementations of the interface need to additionally retrieve the `DataAvailabilityHeader` for the [modified LightBlock](#lightblock).
```

Reviewer 3: Or they can get it from `ResultCommit.SignedHeader.Commit.BlockID.DAHeader` if #304 lands before MVP, not to additional request overhead

Author: > if #304 lands before MVP,

You mean #312?

Yeah, I intentionally didn't want to rely on #312. I can't think of a use-case where the DAHeader would be requested in it's own but I guess it certainly won't harm if it can be requested. We can remove the rpc endpoint / the additional method in the provider later if we wanted.

Reviewer 3: > You mean #312?
Yes

Reviewer 3: > I can't think of a use-case where the DAHeader would be requested in it's own but I guess it certainly won't harm if it can be requested. We can remove the rpc endpoint / the additional method in the provider later if we wanted. It does not introduce any technical debt.

Ok

Users of the provider need to indicate this to the provider.

We could either augment the `LightBlock` method with a flag, add a new method solely for providing the `DataAvailabilityHeader`, or, we could introduce a new method for DAS light clients.

> The latter is preferable because it is the most explicit and clear, and it still keeps places where DAS is not used without any code changes.

Reviewer 3: Why not make DA one and only default case for LL? The argument that it is clear and explicit works only if there is a need to keep both ways to get LightBlock, but why do we need both ways at the same time?

Author: > but why do we need both ways at the same time?

Some light clients will still want to able to run a tendermint light client as before. They do not need the DAHeader.

Good point about the default though.

Hence:

```diff
Index: light/provider/provider.go
===================================================================
diff --git a/light/provider/provider.go b/light/provider/provider.go
--- a/light/provider/provider.go	(revision 7d06ae28196e8765c9747aca9db7d2732f56cfc3)
+++ b/light/provider/provider.go	(date 1620298115962)
@@ -21,6 +21,14 @@
 	// error is returned.
 	LightBlock(ctx context.Context, height int64) (*types.LightBlock, error)

+	// DASLightBlock returns the LightBlock containing the DataAvailabilityHeader.
+	// Other than including the DataAvailabilityHeader it behaves exactly the same
+	// as LightBlock.
+	//
+	// It can be used by DAS light clients.
+	DASLightBlock(ctx context.Context, height int64) (*types.LightBlock, error)
+
+
 	// ReportEvidence reports an evidence of misbehavior.
 	ReportEvidence(context.Context, types.Evidence) error
 }
```

> Alternatively, with the exact same result, we could embed the existing `Provider` into a new interface: e.g. `DASProvider`that add this method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alternatively, with the exact same result, we could embed the existing `Provider` into a new interface: e.g. `DASProvider` that adds this method.
```

This is completely equivalent as above and which approach is better will become more clear when we spent more time on the implementation.

> Regular light clients will call `LightBlock` and DAS light clients will call `DASLightBlock`.

Reviewer 3: Why DAS light client is not a regular light client if LL is based on DAS in the first place?
